Update documentation (#2964)
alphagov/specialist-publisher-rebuild: docs/creating-editing-and-removing-specialist-document-types-and-finders.md

application, [publishing-api][publishing-api] and [search-api][search-api]. You will not have to make any changes to frontend
applications.

### IMPORTANT

> Recent changes to Specialist Publisher now allow users to self-serve. These requests will be coming through Zendesk, as a code diff for the [specialist-publisher][specialist-publisher] repo. Follow the steps below to validate the thoroughness of the changes and open the remaining PRs against [publishing-api][publishing-api] and [search-api][search-api], if needed.

Author: @ChrisBAshton - does this make sense? We'll probably change this as we go, but I think most of this documentation should still stay, despite the automation. Anything else that we should include about the Zendesk PRs at this time?

Reviewer: Yeah that sounds about right 👍

# __Creating__ a specialist document type

<!-- TODO: Update example links in the documentation, to reflect latest documentation. Some of the steps are now no longer needed, but example PRs are outdated since no new requests for changes have been made. Also, remove the notes about not adding enums, once all examples are updated. -->

## 1. Add a schema to Publishing API

> See [example PR here](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-api/pull/2589/files)

Reviewer: I think https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-api/pull/3026 would be a better choice here, as it shows custom metadata fields that PR 2943 does not.

### Create the model

See [CMA cases](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/blob/main/app/models/cma_case.rb).

### Create the view template

- As per the latest changes, the view configuration is now being autogenerated from the schema.
- The configuration for the select type (one/multiple) now lives [in the schema](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/blob/36170eb7841fc4acaad77603f3e55e0a80122a74/lib/documents/schemas/algorithmic_transparency_records.json#L151).

> See [CMA cases](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/blob/main/app/views/metadata_fields/_cma_cases.html.erb).

Reviewer: On line 55 below (GitHub won't let me comment, unfortunately, `https://github.com/alphagov/search-api/blob/1700c85e1484d1d9b2c1d46f276326bc06b51a14/config/schema/field_definitions.json` should be swapped out for `https://github.com/alphagov/search-api/blob/main/config/schema/field_definitions.json`. The referenced commit doesn't exist in the repo history, and this change would bring the link in line with the link on line 54.

Reviewer: On line 70, we reference `email_filter_by` and `email_filter_facets`, which needs updating since #2943 (sorry!).

Reviewer: Line 72 caught me by surprise!

> If your email sign up page should have checkboxes (e.g. [cma-cases](https://www.gov.uk/cma-cases/email-signup)), you will need to edit email-alert-api by adding the new tags to [valid_tags.rb](https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/3e0018510ea85f5d561e2865ad149832b94688a1/lib/valid_tags.rb#L2).

We should think about how best to call that out when making changes to email alert config 🤔

Reviewer: Line 112 also caught me out:

> You'll need to [create the new permission manually](https://docs.publishing.service.gov.uk/repos/signon/usage.html#creating-new-permissions).

This sounds like a recommended step but it isn't really clear (it reads more as guidance than a thing to do). I'm not sure I did it for the last finder or two I wrote 🤔

Author: Added more of a breakdown of email options and also improved permissions bit in latest commits.

### Create the model

See [CMA cases](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/blob/main/app/models/cma_case.rb).

### Create the view template

> - As per the latest changes, the view configuration is now being autogenerated from the schema.

Author: @ChrisBAshton Does this make sense for the view changes? Are you planning to add back in the possibility to customize placeholders and labels? (or whatever else we had custom).

Reviewer: Thanks Laura. Not planning to add back in the option to customise placeholders and labels, no - I'm aiming for 100% standardised, schema-driven views/models etc 😅 

I think this section can be simplified btw, to something like:

```md
Create a `app/views/metadata_fields/_{format_name}.html.erb` file ([example](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/blob/main/app/views/metadata_fields/_cma_cases.html.erb)).

Whilst a handful of legacy finders still use a custom view, all new finders should be referencing the [shared template](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/blob/main/app/views/shared/_specialist_document_form.html.erb), which figures out which form fields to display based on what's in the finder schema.
```

Author: Thanks Chris, I think I will keep a little NB for the select type, whilst the new approach is still a bit fresh.

## 5. Deploy a finder to the draft stack (for previewing)

To deploy a new finder for previewing:
   1. Ensure the finder `target_stack` is set to `draft`
   2. [Deploy the finder](#7-deploy-a-finder) to draft stack
   3. Wait for department's feedback and approval and agree on a release date

NB: Depending on the finder requirements, you may choose to allow the users to publish documents in preview mode, which 
would enable them to test the full finder filtering functionality. Changes to the schema requested after documents have been
published, could require running a reindex, and there is a risk of loss of data. In order to prevent users from publishing,
we could give only basic Signon permissions whilst in preview mode. Signon access to the Specialist Publisher app, only 
gives the user writer access (they may create, edit, and update, but not publish or unpublish).

## 6. Publish a finder to the live stack

To release the finder to the live stack:
   1. Open a new PR changing the `target_stack` of the finder from `draft` to `live` in Specialist Publisher json schema config
   2. [Deploy the finder](#7-deploy-a-finder) to the live stack

> ## 7. Deploy a finder

Author: @ChrisBAshton 

> There's a lot of repeated instructions in this file (e.g. how to republish a finder), and a fair bit of inconsistency as a result (e.g. in how we make edits to the model: sometimes we refer to tests and validation, sometimes we don't).

We had that style before and it gets quite difficult to navigate as you're trying to keep your place in the file. I settled for reusing the "republish a finder" section. Which I now have as its own "7. Deploy a finder". Which sorts of mainly works as a main paragraph/title. And I already find myself having to say things like "if needed" because sometimes you come to this deploy section with 3 PRs sometimes 2, or even 1. Same for the reindex bit, we can be more definitive about when the `update_schema` works or doesn't if we keep this inline. 

What do you think, Chris? To reuse or to repeat? That is the question 😅

## 4. Configure the email sign up page

The email sign up page is rendered by [Finder Frontend](https://github.com/alphagov/finder-frontend) using the schema configuration in specialist publisher.

The finder default is to have no email subscription. Email subscriptions can be set as:

### Subscribe to all fields

- Configure `signup_content_id` - a new `UUID` for the email signup page.
- In the `email_filter_options` hash, set `email_filter_by` to `all_selected_facets`.

> - Set `subscription_list_title_prefix` (optional). <TODO what does this do?>

Reviewer: See my other comment about the topic names. Unlike topic names which determine the suffix, this bit determines the prefix - the beginning bit of the subscriber list title:
https://github.com/alphagov/finder-frontend/blob/08ef89ddd92bd4e1d37256e15b48396bacdb7754/app/lib/email_alert_title_builder.rb#L6-L26

[CMA cases](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/blob/60ed75ec42c1c32d481f7edb9f4ce4fc3a1b643a/lib/documents/schemas/cma_cases.json#L406) has it defined as "CMA cases", forming the prefix of "CMA cases with digital markets unit".

If omitted, as in [medical safety alerts finder](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/blob/60ed75ec42c1c32d481f7edb9f4ce4fc3a1b643a/lib/documents/schemas/medical_safety_alerts.json#L174), it defaults to just listing the facet choices you picked, without any prefix, because I guess the [prefix method in finder-frontend returns `nil` in those situations](https://github.com/alphagov/finder-frontend/blob/08ef89ddd92bd4e1d37256e15b48396bacdb7754/app/lib/email_alert_title_builder.rb#L20). So in that example:

> Field safety notice, national patient safety alert, device safety information, and medicines recall/notification

Author: Updated now.

See [example](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/blob/91ee849549c5e5478126d06842513a516cacceb2/lib/documents/schemas/marine_equipment_approved_recommendations.json#L12).

### Subscribe to specific fields(set)

- Set same options as for [all fields](#subscribe-to-all-fields).

> - Set the `email_filter_options`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Set same options as for [all fields](#subscribe-to-all-fields), _except_ for `email_filter_options`, which needs setting slightly differently:
```

  - Set `email_filter_by` to a specific facet - see [example](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/blob/91ee849549c5e5478126d06842513a516cacceb2/lib/documents/schemas/tax_tribunal_decisions.json#L13).

>   - Alternatively, set `all_selected_facets_except_for` to exclude specific facets - see [example](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/blob/91ee849549c5e5478126d06842513a516cacceb2/lib/documents/schemas/export_health_certificates.json#L8).

Reviewer: Actually this is to be paired with `all_selected_facets` - so should be moved to the section above. From the [doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1hZD3eJjX3qWL6ntWV_aUq0U43m5LIEblwAeIRoUY7x0/edit?tab=t.0):

> `"email_filter_by": "all_selected_facets"`
> This special setting, introduced in [finder-frontend#1757](https://github.com/alphagov/finder-frontend/pull/1757), is used to describe the email subscriber list options open to the user. Sometimes paired with `all_selected_facets_except_for`, which is a way of using `all_selected_facets` but omitting some facets that would otherwise be included (i.e. filterable: true ones with an allowed_values array).

May also be worth calling that out explicitly in the section above (i.e. `all_selected_facets` == all facets that have `allowed_values` and have `filterable: true`, but no other facets).

Author: OH I see 🤔. The `except_` is not something we provide through the UI, correct?

Author: I think I got it now. Pushed changes.

> - Edit [email-alert-api](https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/tree/main/lib) by adding the new filters to [valid_tags.rb](https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/main/lib/valid_tags.rb).

Reviewer: I have a question about this one:

In the [example provided](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/blob/91ee849549c5e5478126d06842513a516cacceb2/lib/documents/schemas/tax_tribunal_decisions.json#L13), (`tribunal_decision_category`), I can see that has been [added to valid_tags.rb](https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/3a0da7545fd88d79263600d1b40451beb82d9300/lib/valid_tags.rb#L69) - but so have all the other `tribunal_decision_*` fields (`tribunal_decision_judges`, etc).

So is the developer expected to add _only the facet referenced by `email_filter_by`, or should they be adding all of the possible facets that can be displayed on the email signup page (i.e. everything `filterable: true` and with `allowed_values`, or should it even be that they add _every_ facet key? I don't know enough about this bit of the system 🤔

Author: It appears that ALL of the facets of a finder that has any type of email subscription, including even the `drug_safety_updates` which has a set `signup_link` and the `export_health_certificates` `certificate_status` which is excluded - are in the valid tags.  

I think we need to test this. There is a good chance these were added due to lack of knowledge of what's required.

Author: `all_selected_facets` definitely don't have their facets listed, so I think we can keep this bit of guidance on valid tags under point 2. Subscribe to specific fields(set)

Reviewer: Investigated: 
https://trello.com/c/gLwEO6ib/3357-update-documentation-for-specialist-publisher#comment-67975901e987e676e348c151

Author: Changes added.

   
Other `email_filter_options` are:
   - `email_alert_topic_name_overrides` - changes the display label of individual facets <TODO in the email?>

>    - `downcase_email_alert_topic_names` - downcases the display label of individual facets <TODO in the email?>

Reviewer: These values are used by Specialist Publisher to determine the `topic_name` that is included in the presenter:
https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/blob/4f52d2397f26fdccde7d5a0165c7aba80831398c/app/presenters/finder_signup_content_item_presenter.rb#L68-L79

The topic_name is [used in finder-frontend's EmailAlertTitleBuilder](https://github.com/alphagov/finder-frontend/blob/08ef89ddd92bd4e1d37256e15b48396bacdb7754/app/lib/email_alert_title_builder.rb#L41-L61) to construct the suffix of the "subscriber list title", which is the identifier given to the subscriber list in Email Alert API.

I _think_ that's all it does. So - [according to the tests](https://github.com/alphagov/finder-frontend/pull/3636/files#diff-c00e3a7c3d858e465d0629e0a5b3d8e59f446e991ba6db1293036835ca7208fbR82) - this setting should only result in a change in how facet options are referred to in the email title.

I've just checked and it doesn't affects the display of the facet options on the email signup pages themselves. For example, CMA cases shows [Digital Markets Unit](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/blob/60ed75ec42c1c32d481f7edb9f4ce4fc3a1b643a/lib/documents/schemas/cma_cases.json#L34-L37) in the config, paired with [downcase_email_alert_topic_names: true](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/blob/60ed75ec42c1c32d481f7edb9f4ce4fc3a1b643a/lib/documents/schemas/cma_cases.json#L8). The [email signup page](https://www.gov.uk/cma-cases/email-signup) shows "Digital Markets Unit", and only on the actual signup confirmation is it then referred to as "CMA cases with digital markets unit"

> ![Screenshot 2025-01-23 at 17 33 17](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fd5a1305-9f9e-4c80-8613-a50947c12525)

Author: I figured it was not visible anywhere in the app, and couldn't remember how to test the email 👀. Updated now.

## Adding a new field to an existing specialist document

1. In `publishing-api`:
   - Add the new field in the [specialist_document schema](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-api/blob/6d5595470bd0e7f3072e06f0113e3ca5514b6e98/content_schemas/formats/shared/definitions/_specialist_document.jsonnet). See [example commit](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-api/pull/2968/commits/b7d9cd1f6bb5d8d08fda7b6e219b2467134406c4).
   - Run `bundle exec rake build_schemas` to regenerate schemas after adding the new value(s).

2. In `specialist publisher`:

>    - Add the new field to the relevant [model](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/tree/main/app/models), with any necessary validations and tests.

Reviewer: We don't mention adding validations and tests in the "Create a model" step at the top of the doc.

Author: Added a mention in the create step as well.

   - Add fields to relevant [schema](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/tree/main/lib/documents/schemas) files. 

>    - Update the [view](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/tree/main/app/views/metadata_fields), if needed. NB: As per the latest changes, you should not need to change the view file. The configuration for the select type (one/muliple) now lives [in the schema](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/blob/36170eb7841fc4acaad77603f3e55e0a80122a74/lib/documents/schemas/algorithmic_transparency_records.json#L151).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - For legacy finders that don't use the shared view, you may need to update the [view](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/tree/main/app/views/metadata_fields).
```

> <!-- TODO: Update these with up-to-date examples that don't include any view changes-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- TODO: Update these with up-to-date examples that don't include any view or 'expanded field' changes-->
```

Author: We have a recent one but it's just values, no facet PRs yet. Thanks for the pointer ;)

 
## 7. Permissions

Specialist Publisher grants access to the publishing interface for a document type to the following Signon users:

1. Users that belong to the owner organisation - have default "write" permissions, allowing them to view and draft new documents.
2. Users that belong to the owner organisation AND have `editor` permission in Signon - are considered "departmental editors" and can publish, unpublish and discard documents.

> 3. Users that have the permission `<your_new_document_type>_editor` in Signon - are granted "departmental editor" access regardless of their organisation. This is sometimes required for cross-departmental documents.

Reviewer: Ah, so _that's_ the reason behind it - good to know. I wondered if perhaps it was also meant for users in an organisation who should be allowed to publish documents for Finder A, but not for Finder B (where both finders are owned by that organisation).

Reviewer: I'd move the permission creation instruction onto this line, and also a clarification that it's not always needed.

```suggestion
3. Users that have the permission `<your_new_document_type>_editor` in Signon are granted "departmental editor" access regardless of their organisation. This is sometimes required for cross-departmental documents. These special permissions need to be [created manually](https://docs.publishing.service.gov.uk/repos/signon/usage.html#creating-editing-and-deleting-permissions) in Signon. You do not need to create this permission unless cross-departmental access has been explicitly requested.
```

Author: > publish documents for Finder A, but not for Finder B 

Woah, that's a possibility. But then again it depends if the people are inside or outside of the organisation. Because if they belong to the organisation they will still have access to both document types, regardless of the custom permission. It's compounded, not exclusive.

> You'll need to manually grant users access to the Specialist Publisher app in Signon, if they do not have it, as well as granting more advanced permissions such as `editor`. Custom cross-organisation permissions also need to be [created manually](https://docs.publishing.service.gov.uk/repos/signon/usage.html#creating-editing-and-deleting-permissions) in Signon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll need to manually grant users access to the Specialist Publisher app in Signon, and the `editor` permission (or custom cross-organisation permissions from step 3 above) if appropriate.
```

1. Deploy Specialist Publisher, deploy after the Search API schema update / reindex to avoid users publishing new documents with the new field.
1. Publish the finder by running the rake task `publishing_api:publish_finders` or `publishing_api:publish_finder[your_format_name_based_on_the_schema_file]` against the specialist publisher app (rake tasks [here](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/blob/ce68fdb008cab05225e0493e19decba5365e1e20/lib/tasks/publishing_api.rake)).

## Removing a field from an existing specialist document

NB: In order to remove a field, ensure no document are tagged with that field, or that the finder's owners are aware of the data loss implications.

1. In `publishing-api`:
    - Remove the field from the [specialist_document schema](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-api/blob/6d5595470bd0e7f3072e06f0113e3ca5514b6e98/content_schemas/formats/shared/definitions/_specialist_document.jsonnet). 

>     - Run `bundle exec rake build_schemas` to regenerate schemas after adding the new value(s).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Run `bundle exec rake build_schemas` to regenerate schemas after removing the value(s).
```

   
   See removal of `key_reference` in [example commit](https://github.com/alphagov/publishing-api/pull/3075/commits/03197cc43f11b762314a17ecbc37ec9601c0ede9).

2. In `specialist publisher`:
    - Remove field from [model](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/tree/main/app/models).

>     - Remove field usage from [view](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/tree/main/app/views/metadata_fields). NB: As per the latest changes, there should be no field usage in the views.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Remove field usage from [view](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/tree/main/app/views/metadata_fields) (if this is a legacy finder that isn't referring to the shared view).
```

## Adding values for existing fields on a specialist document
Specific values for fields of type array are now defined only in the `specialist_publisher` app. To add a value:
1. In `specialist publisher`, add the new values to the relevant file in the [schema](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/tree/main/lib/documents/schemas) directory. See [this](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/pull/2958/commits/930b4c82928a616cc848d1e759cf31b521771b15) commit for an example.
2. Deploy Specialist Publisher.
3. Publish the finder by running the rake task `publishing_api:publish_finders` or `publishing_api:publish_finder[your_format_name_based_on_the_schema_file]` against the specialist publisher app (rake tasks [here](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/blob/ce68fdb008cab05225e0493e19decba5365e1e20/lib/tasks/publishing_api.rake)).

## Removing values for existing fields on a specialist document

> NB: In order to remove a field value, ensure no document are tagged with that value, or that the finder's owners are aware of the data loss implications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

NB: In order to remove a field value, ensure no documents are tagged with that value, or that the finder's owners are aware of the data loss implications.
```

    - Remove field from [schema](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/tree/main/lib/documents/schemas) files.
    - Remove any other usages, such as from tests and factories.
   
   See removal of `key_reference` in [example commit](https://github.com/alphagov/specialist-publisher/pull/2942/commits/6b215cb8d02fdcee6d6e05d108f7e2cffca091c4).

3. In `search-api`, remove the field from:
    - The relevant schema in the [elasticsearch_types ](https://github.com/alphagov/search-api/tree/main/config/schema/elasticsearch_types)directory.
    - The [elasticsearch_presenter](https://github.com/alphagov/search-api/blob/main/lib/govuk_index/presenters/elasticsearch_presenter.rb).
    - The [specialist_presenter](https://github.com/alphagov/search-api/blob/main/lib/govuk_index/presenters/specialist_presenter.rb).
    - The [field_definitions](https://github.com/alphagov/search-api/blob/main/config/schema/field_definitions.json) file.
   
   See removal of `key_reference` in [example commit](https://github.com/alphagov/search-api/pull/3120/commits/b18f25ce86f496e46294ebce6e37e42bf035c105).

To republish the finder:
1. Deploy Publishing API, Search API.

> 2. Run `rake SEARCH_INDEX=govuk 'search:update_schema'` on Search API. If this errors, you may have to do a [full reindex](https://docs.publishing.service.gov.uk/manual/reindex-elasticsearch.html#how-to-reindex-an-elasticsearch-index).

Reviewer 2: I'm pretty sure this will error. I don't think you can remove a field from a mapping, you'd have to do a full reindex, even if there is no data in Elasticsearch for that field. I would argue that we shouldn't reindex every time that we are making field changes and should just make sure it gets done every few months to keep the mappings fresh. Would be good to get @ChrisBAshton perspective, or maybe even the Search API owners' opinions

Reviewer: Definitely up for getting an Search API owner opinion 👍 Can you explain the pros and cons of just running the reindex every once in a while?

My several-steps-removed-from-the-coalface understanding is that without the reindex, the finder wouldn't work. E.g. new facet option added, documents published that that option selected, and then user tries to search for that document, but no results. Or is that _not_ the case - some sort of automatic mapping when new facets defined? - and so we only have to worry about _renamed_ facet keys? (In which case, same situation: user tries to search and gets no results because the mappings are out of date).
^ for that situation, it feels like a "reindex every few months" approach isn't going to work.

NB, (still speaking a mile away from the coalface!), removing an option feels like less of an issue, since it would just disappear as an option from the facets on the finder, so users won't be trying and failing to search for something.

Author: In terms of the documentation itself, I think it's safe to say we need to run `update_schema` on new finders and new facets/values but reindex when making "structural" changes such as changing field(facet)'s types. How does that sound?

Reviewer 2: So, here's how it breaks down:

1. New, changed or deleted facet option

No mapping update or reindex necessary, because Elasticsearch does not have an allowlist of options. We can put any values we want in as long as they are the correct type.

2. New facet

Mapping update (via `update_schema` rake task) necessary, but full reindex not required. Once the mapping has been updated we can start adding data to both existing and new documents for the new field

3. Changed name of facet
We can probably just change the label in Specialist Publisher, there's probably not actually a need to change the field key. If we really want to change the key as well, then declaring a new field and republishing all the content from Specialist Publisher would be sufficient. We could then remove the old field config from Specialist Publisher. The Elasticsearch mapping for the old field would still exist, but it wouldn't be doing any harm.

4. Changed type of facet
The easiest way to do this is just to declare a new field and republish all the content from Specialist Publisher, as for case 3. Again, old Specialist Publisher content could be removed. The Elasticsearch mapping for the old field would still exist, but it wouldn't be doing any harm.

5. Deleted facet
Remove config from Specialist Publisher and republish all content. The Elasticsearch mapping for the field would still exist, but it wouldn't be doing any harm.

Obviously we would end up with a bunch of old mappings hanging around, which over time could be problematic. Therefore we'd probably want to run a reindex on a regular basis, maybe once a month. But it could be just a cronjob that runs overnight rather than a big scary developer task.

4. Remove usages from `search-api`. See [example commit](https://github.com/alphagov/search-api/pull/2881/files).
5. Remove any usages from `finder-frontend`, if applicable.
6. Deploy all changes.

> # Reindexing breakdown

Author: @ryanb-gds I am thinking that the best way to include these instructions is to revert the "Deploy a finder" section and just have the Republish step outlined in each top-level section. Then we can be explicit about if it's an update schema or not.

And maybe rename a facet and type change can have their own entries. 🤔

Reviewer 2: I'm starting to think this document could be broken down into several documents that are structured more around specific tasks. Not about to request you do that as part of this PR though, don't panic! 😅
